To understand how a hospital is doing,
we calculate the hospital’s survival rate
And compare this to its
predicted range of survival
If the hospital is doing as predicted,
then we expect the survival rate
to be within the predicted range
nearly all of the time
But how is the predicted range
of survival calculated?
We look at the children
the hospital has treated
To make the numbers easy, let’s suppose that
the hospital has done exactly 100 heart operations
The NHS collects data on all children who
have surgery, which includes things like
age
weight
diagnosis
Difficulty of the proposed surgery
and complicating conditions.
All of these factors can affect
a child’s chances of survival.
A statistical formula weighs up these factors
for each child and calculates a chance of survival.
We do this for all the children
that the hospital treated
We cannot predict exactly what will happen
to these children, and sadly it is very unlikely
that they will all survive.
A plausible way for things to turn out
is that 2 don’t survive.
giving an overall 98% survival rate
Given all the chances that have been calculated,
another plausible result is
that 3 out of these 100 children
don’t survive.
Giving a 97% overall survival rate.
We can consider lots of other plausible
outcomes for these 100 children.
We calculate the width of the predicted range
so that that the overall survival rate
for the hospital lies within it 19 times
out of 20, given the chances calculated
for these children using the formula.
Let’s watch this in action.
We can keep on considering possible
outcomes for these 100 children.
We calculate the width of this wider interval,
the extended predicted range,
so that the overall survival rate for the hospital
lies within it 998 times out of a 1000.
Again, let’s watch this in action.
We now have the predicted and
extended predicted ranges
for the children treated at this hospital.
When a hospital does relatively few operations,
unforeseeable factors have a bigger influence
on the overall survival rate,
and so it has a wider predicted range
than a hospital that does more operations.
The predicted range depends only
on the children treated by a hospital.
Different hospitals will always have different
predicted ranges since they treat different children.
So, if one hospital has a lower predicted range
than another, it is only because
it treated children with
more complex medical problems.
To read more about the predicted range
along with other information,
please explore our everything else section.